---
_template: page.pug
title: Types of Data Storage
published: 2025-07-22T14:00:00
tags:
    - storage
---

# Types of Data Storage

> _Should I store my data in the cloud, locally, or on DVD?_

There is no one-size-fits-all answer to the question of how data should be
stored. Most people will opt for a mix of storage types depending on what they
need from their data.

The big questions are:

-   How often do you need to update/access your data?
-   How sensitive is your data?
-   What is your data storage budget?

### Cloud Storage

Cloud storage has been marketed as a panacea to all your storage needs. The
reality is lot more complex. For example sensitive data should always be
encrypted before sending it to a cloud provider to mitigate the risk of
unauthorized access. Additionally cloud storage is usually quite expensive.

**PROS**

-   **High Availability**: Cloud storage makes it easy to retrieve your data
    from any device with internet access.
-   **Disaster Resilience**: Providers generally distribute your data across
    multiple geographic locations, mitigating the risk of data loss in a
    localized disaster.

**CONS**

-   **Cost**: Keeping data in a highly available state is expensive. Even
    low-cost providers can charge as much as $75 per TB per year, more than 10x
    what you'd be paying for local storage options.
-   **Trust**: Cloud providers have full access to the data you give to them. If
    they play [fast and loose][msft-scandal] with your data, you're the one at
    risk.
-   **Cyber Attacks**: Cloud providers are an appealing centralized target for
    people looking to steal or destroy data.
-   **Network Limits**: Storing and retrieving large amounts (more than 1TB) of
    data is usually not feasible due to network limitations.

#### Which Data Should I Store in the Cloud?

Cloud storage is an excellent choice for data that needs to be accessed
frequently across multiple devices, but given its cost and security profile you
should aim to minimize the amount of data stored in the cloud.

[msft-scandal]:
    https://stratusgrid.com/blog/microsoft-cybersecurity-investigation

### Local Drives

Local drives have gotten very cheap, with 4TB conventional magnetic disk drives
going for less than $100 and having an expected lifetime of more than 5 years.
That's less than $5 per TB per year. They are also extremely fast by design,
meaning you can access and update your data orders of magnitube faster than the
other options I've listed.

However local drives are probably the most susceptible to data loss. It is very
important to back up important data to other storage options on a regular basis.

**PROS**

-   **Cost**: Local drives are usually the cheapest option available for
    storage.
-   **Speed**: The read and write speeds of SATA and NVMe drives are fast,
    usually only noticeable for very large files.
-   **Control**: Because you have full control of your hardware, you can choose
    how to store your data.

**CONS**

-   **Fire and Flood**: Hard drives generally don't survive common residential
    disasters.
-   **Cyber Attacks**: If a malicious actor gets control of your computer, they
    can easily modify or destroy your data.
-   **Mismanagement**: Mistakes happen. Losing your data due to an accidental
    wrong command is the most common form of data loss.
-   **Power**: Hard drives start to undergo [bit rot][bit-rot] after a couple of
    months without power. They need to be connected to a running system to
    mitigate data loss. This makes them more susceptible to all of the issues
    above.

#### Which Data Should I Store on Local Drives?

Local drives are best for large files that are accessed very frequently, such as
those used by media editing software. If you are a creative who is working with
large files, a proper local drive setup is a must.

[bit-rot]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_degradation

### Optical Media

Short of etching symbols onto granite, optical media like DVDs probably provide
the most enduring form of data storage. DVDs can store about 5GB of data for at
least 5 years for $0.20, or less than $8 per TB per year. There is also a close
cousin of the DVD called an MDISK, which researchers expect to store data
without corruption for [more than one thousand years][mdisk].

**PROS**

-   **Durability**: DVDs or MDISKS stored in a fireproof and waterproof safe
    should survive a typical house fire or flood. They are not susceptible to
    magnetic storms or EMP weapons.
-   **Security**: Unless someone has physical access to your disks, there is no
    way for them to steal or modify your data.

**CONS**

-   **Hardware**: Storing and retrieving data on optical media requires a DVD
    drive, which aren't as common as they used to be.
-   **Complexity**: Reading from and writing to optical media requires some
    understanding of various tools like [ISO 9660 file systems][iso9660].
-   **Loss**: Losing your optical disks means data loss, unless disks have been
    properly replicated and stored in multiple locations.
-   **Speed**: Opical disks are much slower than magnetic disk and solid state
    drives.

#### Which Data Should I Store on Optical Media?

Optical media is best for sensitive data that needs to be stored for a long
time. Due to its slow read speed, this medium is only appropriate for data that
does not need to accessed often. A few examples are backups of family photo
albums, private financial records, or records of personal correspondences.

[mdisk]: https://www.esystor.com/images/China_Lake_Full_Report.pdf
[iso9660]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_9660

## Conclusion

Different types of storage provide different properties. The right storage
solution will generally involve multiple types of storage, like keeping commonly
used files on local drives and cloud storage while regularly backing up critical
data to optical media in case of disaster.

---

**Need more help?** I provide both storage consulting and data archival
services. Please [get in touch](/)!
